# ESSCompress v3.1

A tool to compress a set of k-mers represented in FASTA/FASTQ/KFF file(s). 


## Installation

There are 2 ways to install ESS-Compress: either from source or from pre-compiled binaries.


### 1. Installation from source

#### Pre-requisites
- Linux operating system (64 bit)

- Git

- GCC >= 4.8 or a C++11 capable compiler   

- CMake 3.1+   

#### Steps

Download source and install:

```
git clone https://github.com/medvedevgroup/ESSCompress
cd ESSCompress
./INSTALL
```

Upon successful execution of this script, you will see linux binaries for [kff-tools](https://github.com/Kmer-File-Format/kff-tools) (`essAuxKffTools`), [Blight](https://github.com/malfoy/blight) (`essAuxBlight`), [BCALM](https://github.com/GATB/bcalm) (`essAuxBcalm`), [DSK](https://github.com/GATB/dsk) (`essAuxDsk` and `essAuxDsk2ascii`) and [MFCompress](http://bioinformatics.ua.pt/software/mfcompress/) (`essAuxMFCompressC` and `essAuxMFCompressD`) in the `aux` folder, along with `essAuxValidate`, `essAuxCompress` and `essAuxDecompress` and `getMaxLen`.

### 2. Installation from pre-compiled binaries

#### Requirements

- Linux operating system (64 bit)

#### Steps

1. Download the latest Linux 64-bit binaries
`wget https://github.com/medvedevgroup/ESSCompress/releases/download/v3.1/essCompress-v3.1-linux-64.tar.gz`

2. Extract the `.tar.gz` file and change into uncompressed directory.   
`tar xvzf essCompress-v3.1-linux-64.tar.gz`   
`cd essCompress-v3.1/`


3. You will see two executables in the directory named `essCompress` and `essDecompress`.

	- You can either refer to these two executables
	directly when compressing/decompressing (using the command `./essCompress` and `./essDecompress`),

	- Or, you can move/copy ALL the executables in `essCompress-v3.1/bin` to the `bin` directory that is already in your PATH. For instance, considering `/usr/bin` is already in PATH, you need to run the command `mv ess* /usr/bin` to move all executables for ESS-Compress software. An alternative to moving/copying executables is adding the location of `essCompress-v3.1/bin` to your PATH.


## Quick start with a step-by-step example

*This example assumes that you are currently inside the base directory `essCompress-v3.1` after you have completed installing the tool as per the instructions.*

Lets say you have a small fasta file of sequences, i.e. examples/smallExample.fa, and   
`cat examples/smallExample.fa` returns

```
>
AAAAAAACCCCCCCCCC
>
CCCCCCCCCCA
```
We can compress it using k=11 as follows
```
./bin/essCompress -k 11 -i examples/smallExample.fa
```  
Now `ls examples` will show both original input file and compressed file in the same directory:

```
smallExample.fa
smallExample.fa.essc
...
```
smallExample.fa.essc is a compressed binary file generated by MFCompress, so it is not in a readable format.

To decompress into a readable format, you can run
```
./bin/essDecompress examples/smallExample.fa.essc   
```

You'll now see the decompressed file example.fa.essd in the same directory.   
`cat examples/smallExample.fa.essd ` will return:    

```
>
AAAAAAACCCCCCCCCCA
```
Notice that the decompressed fasta file is not the same as the original file, but it contains the same k-mers as smallExample.fa. You can double check this using the command   
`./bin/essAuxValidate 11 examples/smallExample.fa examples/smallExample.fa.essd`   
If they contain the same k-mers (i.e. 11-mers), you will see an output like this:

```
### SUCCESS: The two files contain same k-mers! ###
```


## Usage details

### essCompress: compression of a k-mer set
```
Syntax: ./essCompress [parameters] 

mandatory arguments:
-k [int]          k-mer size (must be >=4)
-i [input-file]   Path to input file. Input file can be either of these 3 formats:
                     1. a single fasta/fastq file (either gzipped or not)   
                     2. a single text file containing the list of multiple fasta/fastq files (one file per line)
                     3. a single .kff file. In this case, output is a .kff file after compressing in UST mode.

optional arguments:
-a [int]          Default=1. Sets a threshold X, such that k-mers that appear less than X times in the input dataset are filtered out. 
-o [output-dir]   Specify output directory
-t [int]          Default=1. Number of threads (used by bcalm, dsk and blight). 
-x [int]          Default=1. Bytes allocated for associated abundance data per k-mer in kff. For highest compression with kff, by default the program limits 1 byte per k-mer (max value 255).   
-f                Fast compression mode: uses less memory, but achieves smaller compression ratio.
-u                UST mode (output an SPSS, which does not contain any duplicate k-mers and the k-mers it contains are exactly the distinct k-mers in the input. A k-mer and its reverse complement are treated as equal.)   
-d                DEBUG mode. If debug mode is enabled, no intermediate files are removed.
-v                Enable verbose mode: print more useful information.
-c                Verify correctness: check that all the distinct k-mers in the input file appears exactly once in compressed file.
-h                Print this Help
-V                Print version number
```

#### Input for essCompress

Two important input parameters are   
* input [-i]     
* k-mer size [-k]   

If input is a .kff file, [-k] parameter is disregarded.   

File input format can be   
	1. a single fasta or fastq file (either gzipped or not)   
	2. a single text file containing the list of multiple fasta/fastq files (one file per line)	  
	3. a single .kff file. In this case, output is a .kff file after compressing in UST mode.
 

To pass a single FASTA file as input and compress: `./bin/essCompress -i examples/11mers.fa -k 11`


To pass a single KFF file as input and compress: `./bin/essCompress -i examples/kmc_k15.kff`

To pass several files as input, generate the list of files (one file per line) as follows:

```
ls -1 examples/*.fa > list_reads   
./bin/essCompress -i list_reads -k 5
```

ESS-Compress uses BCALM 2 under the hood, which does not care about paired-end information, all given reads contribute to k-mers in the graph (as long as such k-mers pass the abundance threshold).



#### Output for essCompress
If using fast mode/normal mode:
the compressed output is in a file with `.essc` extension.

If using UST mode without kff:
the compressed output is in a file with `.fa.essd` extension.

If compressing a kff file:
the compressed output is in a file with `.compressed.kff` extension.

### essDecompress: decompression of .essc file

        Syntax: ./essDecompress [file_to_decompress]

*Input*: a *.essc* file generated by essCompress   
*Output*: a fasta file with *.essd* extension, where all the distinct k-mers represented by the input .essc file appear exactly once. In other words, output is a [spectrum-preserving string set](http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-45257-5_10).



## Citation

If using ESS-Compresss in your research, please cite
* Amatur Rahman, Rayan Chikhi and Paul Medvedev, Disk compression of k-mer sets, WABI 2020.
